# Table Top System

System for generating rule sets for table top role playing games.

[TOC]

## In This Project

This project include multiple parts, each in its own folder. Each part is
listed here with short description of what it contains. The folders each 

### Rules

The meat of the project, each folder takes a form of module that provides rules
to single part of the game, such as character creation, combat or exploration,
and within that folder are different options for how to handle that part of the
game.

### Guides

Here I try to teach you basic social skills your parents should have taught you
before primary school, but we can't all be winners. No, actually mostly tips
for my self on how to improve storytelling and concentrate on meaningful parts
of world building when creating whole new universe for one shot.

### World

As evident from [this list](https://www.lalato.com/blog/3pp-campaign-settings-for-5e/)
there are clearly enough settings available already. Instead of making generic
fantasy setting X, files here provide examples and instructions on how to create
ones own world or adapt things from one world to another.

### Creatures

Heroes and adventures need foes to fight and interesting beings to interact
with. This module provides descriptions and stat blocks as well as instructions
on how to read and create them and how to use them in game.

### Maps

Battle maps, dungeon maps, town maps, wilderness maps. They all need
interesting features and that is what this part is for.

### Glossary

Glossary defines terms commonly used in the rules.

### Tools

Tools folder contains tools for generating linked hypertext or print documents
of the rules user selects to use.

## Background and aim

In early 2023 WotC had a bit of a fuck up by publishing in production license
that included some laughable attempts to control third party content that they
practically dependent on their success. Well this lead to everyone and their
mother starting to publish their "5e Compatible" legally different rule
reference documents with varying degree fixes. While this certainly falls into
the less remarkable side of these rule sets it has few differentiating factors.

Firstly this rule set accepts that no defined set of rules is going to fit into
every table and campaign. Sometimes there is a good reason to swap rules even
between adventure in same campaign. So instead of providing a single set of
rules, this project gives you a toolbox full of rule snippets intended to work
together in as many different combinations as possible.

Running a hex crawl on a dessert, pick something that places more weight to
heat and water management, exhaustion and travel formations. Running political
intrigue adventure set in steam punk town, take a pack that gives each
character progression options for social powers and ways to manipulate the
steam powered machines for their advantage. Old school dungeon crawl? Take out
inventory sheets that are simple to keep track of, but also require players to
weight value and necessity of each ten foot pole and gem.

Earn experience based on story progression, encounters, achievements or gold
spend. Play a game from ditches to godhood, full campaign staying a just
another soldier, or start straight from mythic adventures, while still having
rewarding character progression.

This is kind of modularity I wish to eventually offer trough this set of rules.

## Conventions

Folders and files in this project are named in lower case with underscore for
white space characters. Each file starts with a top level headline that matches
the files name.

## Permissions

To be honest, most of the stuff here is purely systematic and doesn't likely
count as creative work and thus is not protected by copy right laws. But to
avoid unnecessary court battles, lets say that you are free to use anything
here as long as it can't cause harm to me and if results are published, they
are published in open and free way. If you would want to use something here
commercially, contact me, I'm sure we can make something that works for both of
us.
