# Proficiency

Proficiency is a way to describe characters learned and innate skills that
improve their changes of success over just pure ability and luck.

Proficiencies tell what tools character knows to use, which weapons they have
trained with and what they know more about.

## Using proficiency bonus

When character makes attempts something that requires a roll, and they have
relevant skills, they can add their proficiency bonus for that skill into the
roll along with relevant ability modifier and possible other bonuses.

Proficiency bonus is only ever added to same roll once, if character has multiple
relevant skills, use skill with highest proficiency bonus.

## Tracking proficiency bonus

### Proficiency tiers

Proficiency tiers is a simpler way of tracking characters proficiencies. Each
character has a single proficiency score that increases when they gain levels.
Character also has number of weapons, tools, skills and armour in which
they have either training, proficiency or expertise.

When character has training, they add half of their proficiency score
(rounded down) to relevant skill checks. When they have proficiency, they add
their whole score as is, and when they have

If character has training in relevant skill, they add half of their proficiency
bonus (rounded down) to the check, on top of ability score modifier and possible
other bonuses. If they have expertise, they add twice their proficiency bonus.

### Proficiency points

Proficiency points are a more granular way of tracking proficiency. When
characters gain levels, they gain proficiency points they can assign to
different skills.


### Levels of proficiency

### Weapon proficiencies

Weapon proficiency allows character to add their proficiency bonus to strikes
and manoeuvres made using weapon that belongs to category.

Point of weapon proficiencies is to restrict efficient tools available for
character while allowing them to have their own specialisations. Dividing magic
weapons in treasure evenly to different proficiency groups means loot will also
divide evenly to 
Weapon proficiencies should be divided so that 

Weapon proficiency groups:

Axes

Hammers and picks

Clubs and maces

Flails

Short blades

Long blades

Spears

Polearms

Staffs

Bows

Crossbows

Slings

### Armour proficiency

Armour proficiency allows character add their proficiency in checks made to over
come restrictions of their armour. Such checks might be strength check to avoid
movement speed penalty, casting ability check to avoid arcane spell failure

Armour proficiency comes in 3 variants, light armour, medium armour and heavy
armour.

Light armour offers little protection, but doesn't restrict mobility

