# Traps

Traps are passive hazards that can challenge players to find a way around them
or use their resources.

This file tells general information about designing and running game with traps,
other files in this folder describe example traps.

## Parts of trap

### Warning
Warning is something that tells players there might be a trap nearby. If one of
the other parts of the trap is clearly visible, then they can also double as a
warning of the trap.

Purpose of the warning is to make the trap fair for the players, as such it
should be detectable without needing to pass perception checks. Warning should
also tell something useful about the trap even if they don't succeed in any
checks made to investigate the warning.

Warning can tell how dangerous the trap is, for example, a corpse of a creature
that has died to the trap, can give an estimate of how much damage the trap
deals on minimum. A death rat won't tell much, but if there is a death giant on
a hallway, then medium sized players would be correct to assume they are in
lethal danger.

Warning might tell what kind of danger the trap possesses. Charred shield,
breastplate with a large dent, corroded blade and discoloured corpse all warn
about different kinds of dangers.

Warning can reveal rough position of the trap's trigger or area of its hazard.
Marks from arrows in wall tell that at least this wall gets hit by them. Bloody
shoes might mark the pressure plate that triggers disintegration ray.

Without warning traps are just a passive resource drain, rather than interesting
part of the play. If the players don't have a idea about presence of a trap, the
have no choice in matter of how to approach it. And if they see that there are
traps without warnings, it can lead to them checking for traps in every single
room, hallway, door and chest, which will slow the game down without any gains.

Only use traps without warning, when the point of the trap is in handling the
hazard. Traps that trigger gauntlets, or cause complex poison or curse effects
to one character are suitable to be used without warning.

On the other hand, warnings should not be two obvious. Good warning is usually
one of three minor details listed at end of description for new area or trapped
object players ask about. This means that the players need to pay attention to
whole description, and decide which points warrant further investigation.

### Trigger

Trigger is what makes the trap's hazard take effect. A pressure plate that
releases swinging blade, tripwire that pulls the trigger of crossbow, a magical
rune that animates nearby statues when touched by living creature.

Trigger can also be abstract, a line decided by hiding kobolds to be when they
push the logs down the slope. Trap without a trigger is just a passive obstacle
or hazard.

Trigger is also usually the best hidden part of a trap. Trap makers know that
avoiding the trigger means avoiding the trap, so they make that as difficult as
possible. When trigger is not hidden, it is usually obfuscated to not look like
a trigger, but something necessary to interact with to progress.

But you can also use trap where the trigger is clearly visible and only warning
about the trap as a way to see if your players are willing to gamble with their
characters' lives. In such case you must also make it very difficult to obtain
the reward without interacting with the trigger.

From game play perspective, always make sure that the trigger is something that
is either certainly triggered or not triggered when player character takes the
action player describes. Questions about where does the character step are good
way to waste perfectly good trap, while not asking them when they matter will
most likely lead to animosity between game master and players.

Some triggers are timed, giving some time between the trigger is activated and
the hazard activating. It is usually good option to tell players that they have
activated the trigger, they might feel the tripwire or pressure plate moving, or
the runes of magical trap might start to glow. After this, ask them how they
react. Given the reactions, you might declare that the character avoids the trap
completely or has boon or penalty to their saving throw.

### Hazard

Hazard is what makes the trap dangerous. It can be the pit under a trapdoor,
stones falling from the ceiling, a beam of magical energy or even enemies
waiting to ambush the players from advantageous position.

When hazards primary function is to deal damage, it is good to adjust this
damage to level where it won't outright kill characters of expected power, but
the damage should also be considerable enough, that beefier characters or ones
with access to magical healing don't feel like just taking the damage is the
optimal choice.

Hazard can be lethal, but it should not be immediately lethal, that is to say,
that you should always give your players a change to do something against the
hazard before killing them. For example, poison might cause damage continuously
every combat or dungeon turn, until it is neutralized or kills the character.
This gives the players a change to use antidote, cast a spell or make a heroic
charge into unknown enemies. Deathly course might require character to make
certain number of saves before failing that many, allowing other players to give
them bonuses to these saves or find other ways to break the course.

### Bait

Bait is something that gives the players reason to interact with the trap, to
find a way around it, to try to disable it or even risking it without additional
protections.

If reward for trap is visible, that will usually work as a bait as well, but
sometimes just the curiosity of the players is enough. A door that they can't
reach from other side, a corner they can't see behind or a closed chest. These
all are reason to expect there is something protected by the trap and that will
usually be enough if the reward size is usually taken care off.

Other options for bait are a promise of a short cut or ambush position, clearing
a safe way for hirelings and different quest objectives.

### Reward

Reward is the payout for solving the trap. When the trap is guarding a treasure,
the reward is obviously the treasure, but it can be many other things as well.

In dungeon crawl, where returning to safety and reaching the area that you want
to investigate is already a risky and time consuming operation, significant
short cut can be worth a barrel full of treasure or save someone's life.

Getting advantageous position in a fight is also usually a good reward. Maybe
enemies trapped the entrance because they did not have resources to guard it,
so getting past the trap means getting behind their cover.

Not every trap needs a reward, but players will be much more inclined to
interact with them, if they usually lead to some form of reward. Similarly just
avoiding damage is rarely enough of a reward, because just turning back usually
achieves the same result, and should only be used if passing trough the trap is
a necessary part of reaching larger reward.
